welcome to this very important presentation in this lecture we will study three things the first one is State table the second one is State diagram and the last one is State equation I am having a sequential circuit on the left hand side of my screen and it is actually not a complete sequential circuit because I have not shown the internal circuitry and it is not required at this point of time because because you have to learn the basic of a state diagram and from the next presentation we can carry on with the complex circuits in this you can see
there is one input x two flip-flops are used both of them are JK and one output Y is there now the first thing comes State table so State table in sequential circuit we use State table instead of the truth tables you remember in combinational circuits we use the truth table to get the information about the circuit and by knowing it we know how the connection is there and what types of gate are involved similarly by using the state table we can know the connection of a sequential C how input and outputs are connected and how flip-flops are
connected also so I can say that a state table is the table which tells us about the relation between the present state next state and the outputs the present State and next state you already know so I can make a state table in which the first column represents the present State and present state will be determined by knowing the value of QA QB that are simply the output of my two flip-flops used then this state will be changed by the value given to this sequential circuit and we are giving X so X is my input and
depending upon X the state will change so in the next column I'm having the next state and the next state is Q A+ QB + and finally my output y so this is a simple State table and by using this state table I can have my state diagram which is very important so let's see what is a state diagram the first step is to know how many states are there and it can be done by looking to the number of flip flops there are two flip flops and two outputs QA and QB therefore I can have 2 to the^ 2 = to 4 four states and they are written as s0
s0 is my state 1 and it is 0 0 Q is 0 QB is 0 the second state is S1 01 S2 1 0 and finally S31 1 now each of these States from s0 to S3 is represented by a bubble like this okay and as there are four states I'm having four bubbles this first one represents s0 in which the value of Q and QB are 0 0 second one is 0 1 S2 1 0 S3 1 1 if you want to write this value 0 0 it's okay or you can just simply write s0 S1 S2 and S3 as this is the first lecture I'm writing these things down now let's see what is the next step of RS you have to
see the present state let's say the present state is 0 0 and the input when the present state is 0 0 is one then the next state will become let's say 1 0 and the output is 1 if this is the case we don't know the internal circuit here but I'm just assuming I'm taking a random output and random next state and uh I have written it here and I'm just using it to show you what is the state diagram so we are at 0 0 it means we are at s0 and the input given is one and once I give the input as one our next state becomes 1 0 and 1 Z is S2 so I will go
to 1 Z and an arrow will be there showing that I'm shifting from S zero now we have to also give information about the input and output so that we may know that what input made us to move from s0 to S2 so x/ y x is my input why is my output this is the way to show the input and output in my state diagram so the input was one and output was one as well similarly we can check for the rest of the cases and we can make our state table it will look something like this it may be anything depending upon the logic given here so this is a simple
State diagram and uh in this presentation I'm going to make the state diagram for J K flipflop this is the characteristic table for JK flipflop and I can use this characteristic table as my state table because there is no external input like X and output like y we are just having a flipflop that is JK the inputs are J and K this is my input and the present state is qn and the next state is qn + 1 so I can make a state diagram easily two possible States are there because only a single flip-flop therefore two possible States s0 is 0
and S1 is one so I will make two states this is s0 this is S1 let's check for the first case and in this you can see that the present state is zero it means we are on s0 and when we make Jal to 0 K = to 0 the next state will also be zero so this thing is shown like this in state diagram and we also have to write the input so the input is 0 0 okay similarly we will check for the second case and here the present state is zero it means we are on s0 and when we make J equal to 0 K = to 1 we are again going to be on zero it means the
same arrow is going to do the work but we have to change the inputs it is 01 and uh we can now see that J is 0 0 whereas K is don't care so I will rub this thing and uh I will write zero don't care okay similarly we will check for the third case when the present state is zero and J is 1 K is zero the next state will become one now this time we are going from one state to other we are on s0 and we are going on S1 and in that case J is 1 K is0 similarly we will see the fourth case the present state is zero V are on as
zero J is 1 K is 1 the next state is 1 so 1 1 again you can see that 01 our K is 0 1 and J is 1 one it means K is a don't care and I will rub this thing down and I will write one don't care so this is the way to make a state diagram I will complete for the rest four cases and uh in the fifth case you can see that the present state is one so I'm on S1 and when we make JK 00 0 I'm going to be on S1 so again I'm on S1 When J is 1 K is 1 sorry when J is zero K is zero for the sixth case I'm on S1 and I will be on s0
when j0 K is 1 so S1 to s0 j 0 K is 1 very simple for the seventh case I am on S1 you can see I am on S1 and I will be on S1 When J is 1 K zero it means we have to include more inputs here for the same transition and uh I will rub this thing down and uh before rubbing it let me tell you that J is a don't here k is a zero so we can write it don't care zero now let's check for the last case when the present state is one and the next state is zero it means I'm going from S1 to s0 when both of the J and K are one it
means again the don't care is involved and the don't care in this case is J so J is a don't care and K is one so this is a complete State diagram for the JK flipflop and it's very easy to make one once you know this thing once you know the basic from the next presentation we will go to a much complex sequential circuit and the state diagram obtain will be very complex as compared to this one there are different States involved because there are more than one flip-flop and also the transition is not that simple so for that you have to see
the next presentation and also I believe you will revise these things down that will help you to solve the problems in the sequential circuit now the last part is the state equation State equation so State equation is nothing but a equation in which the left hand side the LHS is the next state that is qn + 1 the next state and rhs rhs is the combination of the present State and the input and this combination the combination of present State and input will make the next state qn + 1 equal to 1 so this is a simple
definition of of a state equation and if I make a state equation for the JK flipflop it will look something like qn + 1 the next state on the LHS equals to qn complement J plus that is our R operator qn K complement rhs is having the combination of the present State and the inputs and this combination will give the next state equals to one so this is all for this presentation I'm going to end it here and please go through this revise it and we will meet in the next presentation so see you in the next one







[music] In this presentation, I will teach you how to design the clocked sequential circuits. It is a very important topic in the digital electronics course. And the only thing you have to do is to remember these nine steps that I have already written on the board. I will also follow these steps to get to the result in this presentation.
And definitely requires time to obtain the result by using this nine steps. So this presentation will be a little bit lengthy. So we will start from the step number one. Let's read what it says. A state diagram or timing diagram is given which describes the behavior of the circuit that is to be designed. So initially you are having a question and in that question a state diagram or a timing diagram is given and this state or timing diagram definitely describes the behavior of the circuit that we need to design and ultimately we want this
circuit. We want the circuit by using the flip-flops. As it is a sequential circuit, we require the flip-flop and also some combinational logic is there. So I have already made the state diagram that we will solve in this presentation. We have to find out the circuit for this state diagram.
So our step number one is over. We have our state diagram. Now we will move to step number two. And step number two says obtain the state table. So for this state diagram we have to obtain the state table. So let's make the state table for it. The first column of the state table gives us the present state. So I will write PS for it.
PS is for the present state. And in present state I will take QA QB as the two outputs of the flip-flop. and they are making the two bits of the present state because you can see the states are four and each of the state is represented by a two bit binary number 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 that's why I have taken QA QB which represents the two bits of the present state now in the next column I will have my next state and the next state is evaluated when the input X is zero as well when input X is one so when input X is zero the next state will be QA + QB+. Similarly, when
input X is equal to 1, I will have QA + QB + this plus sign represents it is the next state. And in this way, we have the second column. Now we have the output column. The output is let's say Y and it is also dependent upon the input when input is zero and when input is one. So we have made our state table.
Now the next thing that we have to do is to fill this state table. So first I will fill all the states 0 0 1 1 0 1 1. Now when input X is 0 and I'm on 0 0 is my this first state and if input is zero this represents the input X and this represents the output Y. So when input X is zero, you can see this arrow is on the same state which shows that I am on 0 0 and I'm going to be on 0 0.
It means the next state is the same as 0 0. So 0 0 qa plus is 0 as well as qb plus is 0. Now when x is equal to 1 and you are on 0 0 we are on 0 0 and when x is equal to 1, I will be on 01. And that's why the next state will become 01 for the input when it is 1. Similarly, we can check for 01. You are here.
And if the input is equal to zero, you can see input is equal to zero. You are directed to 1 one. So the next state will be 1 one when input is zero. And uh I will also write the output in at the same time. Here the output was zero. So zero. And uh for this output is also zero. So again zero. And for this case output is 0. So zero.
Now we will see when input is 1 x is equal to 1 and we are on 01. So again I'm going to be on 01. You can see input is 1 and it is directed on the same state. So we are going to be on the same state with output equal to 0. So the same state it means 0 1 and output is 0. We will check when the state is 1 0.
If input is equal to zero, we are going to be on same state. So 1 0 when input is zero and the output is one in this case. So I will write one here. And when the input is equal to one, it means this case I will move to 0 0. So I will move to 0 0 when input is one with output equal to one. So output is one. Now we will check for the last case when the state is 1 one.
If the input is one, I will be on the same state. And if the input is zero, I will go to 1 0. So when input is zero, 1 0 and when input is one, 1 1. The output is zero. So zero here. And again zero when the input is zero. So zero. In this way, we have completed this state table. And now we will move to step number three. Step number two is done.
So step number two is completed. And step number three says the number of states can be reduced by the state reduction method. We have already studied the state reduction method. And if you want to reduce the number of state actually you cannot want it. If you want to check it, it doesn't depend upon your will that you can reduce the states.
Definitely there may be a chances of the reduction then only the state can be reduced. So we have to see whether we can reduce the states or not. And the process to do this is to check the next state and the output. If the next state for the two states are same. For example, if I check for let me change the color for this purpose.
For example, if I check for this 0 0 state and 01 state, then the next state of 0 0 must be same as the next state of 01. So they must be same. And also the output of 0 0 and 0 1 will be same. And we can see there is no such cases in this state table. So there is no state reduction possible.
So the step number three is also completed and we cannot reduce these states further more. They are already reduced. You can check 0 0 1 1 0 1. There is no next state same. There is no 0 0 in this whole column repeated. And there is no one one in this whole column repeated. That's why there is no next state same for the two present states. So we cannot reduce it.
It's very simple. So we are done with the step number three. The states cannot be reduced further more. Now the step number four says do the state assignment if required. Now let me explain this point in brief. The state assignment is a very simple thing. You have to just assign the states equivalent to the binary code.
For example, if I have four states and let's say the name of this state is A. The name of this state is let's say this state is B. This is C and this is D. Then what you have to do? You have to assign the binary number so that you can do the operations on them so that you can find out the input values of your flip-flop.
You cannot operate with ABC D. They are not the numbers. You cannot have the input of the flip-flops when you will operate with ABC D. So you have to do something so that you have the binary numbers representing your states. So we will do a simple thing. A is equal to 0 0 B is equal to 0 1 C is equal to 1 0 and D is equal to 1 1.
This is called as the state assignment. But in this particular example, we don't have to do the state assignment because already 0 0 1 0 0 1 and 1 is assigned to this states. So we don't require to do the state assignment here. But in many cases they just give the states name by using the alphabet. So in that case you have to do the state assignment.
So we are done with the step number four. We don't have to do the state assignment. I'm going a little bit fast in this intermediate steps because you have already learned these things and it is not required to explain this more here. So I'm going a little bit fast. Don't worry, I will slow down when the important point comes.
Let's see what step five says. Determine the number of flip-flops required and assign the letter symbols. Wow, this is the good point that you have to see. There are four states and this four states can be implemented by using the two flip-flops. So we are going to use two flip-flops and I will give the name to the flip-flops.
The last sentence says assign letter symbols. For example, I will say my flip-flop one is A and my flip-flop 2 is B. This is the name for my flip-flops and depending upon this name I have given Q and QB. QA is the output of the A flip-flop. QB is the output of the B flip-flop. So this is the way to do the assignment of the letter symbol to our flip-flop.
So we are done with the step number five. We have determined the number of flip-flops. I'm going to use two flip-flops because four states are there and I have already assigned the letter symbols. You can see from the state table QA B A and B are the assigned letter symbols to my two flip-flops. Let's move to step number seven and this is the most important steps out of all the nine steps.
It says derive the circuit excitation table from the state table. This is my state table and by using this state table we have to find out the circuit excitation table. So I will make circuit excitation table here. CIR CUIT circuit excitation table and the first column of this circuit excitation table is for the present state.
The second column is for the input X. So let's make it fast. I will have the eight possible combinations for my QA, QB and definitely for X. I will write X here. Now I will write the eight possible combinations. 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 These are the four combinations. Now we have 1 0 0 1 0 1 and the last two combinations are 1 1 0 and 1 1.
So these are the eight possible combinations of the present state and the input x. Now we have the next column giving us the next state giving us the next state and next state is QA plus and QB+. Then we have the flip-flop inputs. The flip-flop inputs and finally we have the output Y. So let me separate them by the straight lines and then we will move forward to fill it.
Okay. Now we can use the state table to fill the circuit excitation table. When the present state is 0 0 and input X is also zero the next state you can see from here is 0 0. So I will write 0 0 here. Similarly if the present state is 0 0 and input is 1. This case present state is 0 0 and input is 1.
I have the next state QA plus and QB+ equal to 01. So I will write 0 1. In the same way we will fill for 0 1 when the input is 0 and 1. You can see 1 1 and 0 1. So I will directly write it 1 1 0 1 and then we have 1 0 and 0 0. So 1 0 and then 0 0 and for the final two cases we have 1 0 and 1 1. So 1 0 and 1 1.
So this is how we have to fill the next state in the circuit excitation table. In the same way I will fill the values of my output. 0 0 0. So four zeros are there. 0 0 and then 0. Then we have 1 1 0 0. So 1 1 0 0. So we are done with the informations that we can have from the state table. Now we have to use the properties of the flip-flop that we have to implement and as I have told earlier I'm going to implement this circuit by using the T flip-flop.
So we need the truth table of the T flip-flop to get the flip-flop inputs and the flip-flop inputs are definitely the two inputs are there. The first one is TA and the second one is TB. TA is the input of my A flip-flop and TB is the input of my B flip-flop. To get the input TA, we have to see Q A and QA plus the present state and the next state of the A flip-flop.
And you already know the truth table for the T flip-flop is clock T qn + 1 where qn + 1 is the next state. If clock is zero, whatever be the value of t, the output is going to be the same which means the memory. If clock is high, T is low, it means the output is again the memory.
And if the clock is high and T is also high, it means it is toggling. QN complement QN qn + 1 and then T 0 0 1 1 0 1 1. If QN is 0 and QN + 1 is 0. So it means T is 0. If QN is 0 and QN + 1 is 1, it means T is 1. And if qn is 1, tn plus 1 is zero. Again t is one. And if both are same, it is zero. So this is a basic thing that you have learned in the t flip-flop.
Now we will use to get the values of ta and tb. So first we have to see qa and qa plus. QA is my present state and QA plus is my next state. If QA is zero and QA plus is zero, you can see from here T is going to be zero. So TA is zero. If QA is zero and QA plus is zero, again T is zero. If QA is zero and QA plus is 1, you can see from here T is going to be 1.
QA is 0, QA plus is zero, again zero. Both are same. QA is 1 and QA plus is one. From the last case, you can see T is zero. And if QA is 1, QA plus is zero, again T is 1. And uh let me generalize it. We are not going to do it every time. You can see t is the exor combination of qn + 1 and when there is exor combination it is very clear that it is the odd ones detector.
Whenever there is odd ones in the input we have output is high. So we will just check the odd number of ones and we will have our flip-flop inputs. One one even number of ones. So zero one one again even number of ones then zero. Now we will do the same step for the TB. And in this case and in this case we will see QB and QB plus.
So 0 0 it means zero 0 1 odd number of ones it means 1 1 even one 0 1 1 again 0 0 it means 0 0 it means 0 1 0 odd number of ones then one and finally 1 one it means zero. So we have completed this step number seven and we have our circuit excitation table. A very important step. Now the step number eight says obtain the expression for the circuit output and the flip-flop input.
You can make the K map for this purpose. But in this case I don't see so many ones in my input and output. That's why I'm not going to use the K map but I will write directly the values by the boolean algebra. TA is high at this point and at this point and for this I have QA complement. Let me slide this board.
For this I have QA complement QB and QB and X complement and X complement. Similarly for this one I have QA QB complement X. So QA QB complement X. So this is the function for TA. You cannot minimize it further. So I will stop here and then I will move for TB. TB is high for this and for this. So let's see what we got here.
01 it means QA complement QB complement X or for this one I have QA QB X complement. So this is what we got from the table and uh finally we will see for the output y and it is high for this two cases it means 1 zero. So q a qb complement x complement or I have a qb complement x. So let's see we can do some minimization or not.
I can take Q A QB complement common. So Q A QB complement and we have X complement or X and everyone knows that X complement or X is equal to one. So I have QA QB complement and one and finally I have QA QB complement as my Y. So we are done with our step number eight and finally we can move to our last step which is the implementation of the circuit.
Now you can easily implement by using these expressions your circuit. You have to make two flip-flops. The first one is a flip-flop. Then you have to make the second flip-flop. This is the b flip-flop. TA is the input. TB is the input and QA is the output. QB is the output. And finally you have to find out the Y.
You can easily implement it by using the logic gates. You have to use the three input and gate and or gate to implement TA. Similarly, you will use three input two and gates and one or gate. Two input orgate and you will use uh two input and gate for Y. So, I hope you can do it. Let's not waste time on it.
You have already done these things thousands of time. So these are the nine steps required for the implementation purpose of our clocked sequential circuit.









there are two models developed for representing synchronous sequential circuits and we will talk about these two models in depth in this presentation I will dictate one model and in the next presentation we will talk about the another one so what are these two models let me write the names of this two model the first one is the more circuit m o r e c Kade and it is also called as more State machines State machines and the second one is the melee m e a l y circuit or it is called as the melee State machine okay these are the two
models that we have to see and they are very important if I talk about the state diagrams so what are these two models and how they are different from each other the main question is how they are different from each other so they differ only in the way the output is generated you already know what is sequential circuits it consist of the combinational circuit and a memory block the memory block is nothing but your flip-flops and uh if you want to calculate the output okay then it may depend upon the input and definitely the present state but
sometimes it doesn't depend upon the input and in that case we call it the mo circuit so let me write this important Point down the difference between these two circuit is only in the way the output is generated so we have to see how the output is being generated in the more circuit and how the output is been generated in the melee circuit so we will first see the output of the mo circuit and in this case the output is the function of the present state only the output is the function I want you to write this points down so that it may
help you later the output is the function of present state only okay here only is there so it only depends upon the present State whereas in case of M State machine means the output the output is the function is the function of present State as well as the input okay so this is the main difference between the melee and the more State machines and in this presentation we will talk about the more State machine and in the next presentation we will see what is the mil machine so here you can see a block diagram is there of the sequential
Circuit of course course and this combinational logic is there which we call as the next state combinational logic sometimes also called as the next state decoder the next state of the sequential circuit will be decided upon the logic given here and whatever be the next state is stored here and uh the one important thing that you can see here is the another combinational logic and depending upon which the output is being generated and and here you can clearly see that the output is only the function of this present State this is my present
State the present state is stored in this memory and the output you can see is only determined by the value of this present State there is no impact of this input directly on the output the input is not given in this combinational logic so the output is function of only the present State and that's what we have written here the output is the function function of only present state so this shows the mo model of the sequential circuit now I will show you one example in which we will try to find out whether it is a mo circuit or it is a melee
circuit so I will paste it down this is the example in which I have used the T flip flops and some gates so let's try to find out what is the next state combinational logic in this circuit in the sequential circuit and what is the output combinational logic so let's try to find that thing first you can see here the input is a a is given to this two logic gates and uh this is our next state logic combinational logic and uh this orgate is our output combinational logic so we have found out these things and now we will will try to
find out the value of y on what factor y has been depending so here you can see there are two inputs to this orgate a two input orgate is being used and the output that is our y this is our output is the output of this orgate so whatever be the input to this orgate is going to give our y if we or them so the first input is QB complement you can clearly see so QB compliment and the second input to this R gate is this one that is my QA you can see it is coming in this way and going as the second input to this gate so q a so Y is
my QB complement or QA you can see a here no there is no a in this expression the Y is independent of in the pendent of a that is our input so it is clearly a mo model or the mo State machine so this is how you have to check whether it is a mo State machine or it is a millist state machine and if you want to make the state diagram then definitely there will be some changes in the state diagram that we will see now if you have a normal or you can say that the original state diagram having four states let me draw these four states and
we will see what changes we have to make to make it the mo State diagram and in this four states let's say this is our 0 0 0 1 1 0 and one one okay and uh depending upon the inputs the output is been generated and also the state will change from one to another let me complete it randomly 0 0 this 0 is my input this 0 is my output then I'm going from 0 to 1 one if the input is one and then output will be zero I'm on one and I will be on one if input is one and then output will be 0er 1 one to 1 0 for the input 0er same state for the input 1
1 0 to 0 1 for the input 0o and 0 1 to 0 0 for one and the last thing is this now this is uh original state diagram and I want uh more State diagram by using this state diagram so what changes we have to do we have to remove this output from here and we have to put it under this state so let's see how it looks I will just make the bigger circles because I need to put the output inside this circle let's make it a little bit more bigger and uh then I will write the state 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 and then the change is here I have to make the output
appearing inside this state okay so zero is my output you can see Zer is the output and uh 1 0 0 and the rest thing will be same the inputs zero and then one one and it is my zero then one 0 0 and finally one this is my input this zero here is my output so this is simply more State diagram and you have learned what changes you have to make to convert it to a mood State diagram a modified State diagram for a mood circuit you can say from the original state diagram so this is all that you need to know about the mo State machines and I hope you got it
if you have any problem you can ask it in the comment section I hope it is clear to you because it's not that much tough thing to understand it's very easy only thing we have to remember is the output the output is the function of present state only and where the present state is been stored it is stored in the flipflop our memory block okay so it's very simple nothing to worry about and we will see the mely state machines in the next presentation





In the last presentation we completed the more state machines and uh now we are going to do the millie state machines or millie circuit. If you remember I told you the main difference between these two types of model or these two types of circuit is the way the output is generated. Okay. And in case of more state machines the output was the function of only the present state.
Whereas if I talk about the merely state machine the output is the function of present state as well as the input. So this is a very important point to remember and uh I also explained you this block diagrams in which the first one is my next state decoder. Depending upon this logic the next state is decided and there is a input.
Let's say this input is a. We are giving this a to this next state combinational logic and the output of this combinational logic will decide the next state and this is my memory block and the present state is stored here. This whole block diagram is for the more state machine and you can see the output let's say output is y is the function of the present state only to make it merely state machine I need this output as the function of the present state and also the function of the input which means a so there is a small change to make it the me state
machine I will take this input from here and uh I will give it to this output combinational logic. Now you can see the output is the function of the present state as well as the input. So this is a mill state machine. Now we will see one example related to the millie state machine.
I will take the same example as the last one and I will do a small change to convert it to the millie. And let me paste it down. We will drag it to the bottom of the board so that we can analyze it peacefully. Okay. And this is the same example you can see from the previous lecture. And the change that I'm going to make in this circuit is to make this output y the function of a.
So I will take this a from here like this and I will give it to this or gate. Now you can see that the y is what? Q b complement. This is QB complement and QA is the another input. So R Q A or A. Now this output is the function of the input and also it is function of the value stored in the flip-flop.
So we can say that it is the MLE state machine or MLE circuit. So once you have the idea about the mele and m state machine basically the difference between them it's not a big deal to do this things. You can easily get by looking to the circuit diagram and also by looking to the state diagram that whether it is a merely state machine and whether it is a more state machine and uh there are some questions in which it is specially specified that we have to consider it as the millie or we have to consider it as the more that's why it is an important topic
before actually going further to solve the problems related to the state diagram that's why I completed it here in the coming presentation we will do the analysis using the JK flip-flop, D flip-flop and T flip-flop. Then we will see the sequence detector or pattern detector. So these all topics are very important and uh carries a good weightage if you are preparing for any exam.
There is one more point that I want to tell you is the implementation of a logic function needs more number of states than me circuit in case of more circuit. Okay. So I can also say it as the implementation of the same logic function requires less number of states than the more circuit. So in millie in millie the number of states are less as compared to the more circuit if we are implementing the same logic.
So this is what I want to tell you and uh I will end this lecture here. See you in the next one.